[THEME MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: Welcome
to Beyond Belief.
We have an amazing
program for you tonight.
Jason Padgett with
us, a number theorist
with acquired Savant syndrome.
A traumatic brain injury changed
his life forever and made him
a mathematical genius.
>>JASON PADGETT: Some people
would consider it that.
But for me, it's more--
it just makes the
mathematics behind motion
and behind equations
much more easy to see.
>>NOORY: Prior to
this injury, which
we'll get into in
a second, Jason,
you weren't that good with math?
>>PADGETT: No, I had
basically a pre-algebra.
I thought math was stupid.
I would literally say things
like, when are you going
to use that in the real world?
>>NOORY: Well, after
the injury, how did you
know that your
mathematical skills had
changed for the better?
>>PADGETT: So the
very first thing
that I noticed is that
when things moved instead
of looking smooth
and continuous,
they were discrete and chunky.
So a good way to
think about it is
like when you're
making a film, you're
taking individual
picture frames,
and then you're
running them quickly.
And it makes it
look like motion.
Well, we construct a picture
the same way with our brains.
And it looks smooth
because one part
of your brain, its
function is to smooth out
the picture frames so that
they don't look jittery.
And that part of my
brain was affected.
And so when things move now,
I see the picture frames.
But when you get into
physics and mathematics,
you're literally just looking
at different time units,
and getting those
units closer together
to get a better approximation
of what's occurring in reality.
So we're all doing calculus
and physics in the background,
we're just not aware of it.
>>NOORY: Jason, explain to
us what Savant syndrome is?
>>PADGETT: So Savant
syndrome is, many times,
it's people who excel in one
specific area or a tiny slice
of an area.
And everything else is either
average or below average.
And for me, it's mathematical
skills, specifically
the geometry of math.
>>NOORY: So when those
skills aren't up to par,
what's causing that?
>>PADGETT: I mean, each person
has gifts in different areas,
depending on what part of your
brain has more connections
and where those connections are
hooked to makes each person's
individual brain unique.
>>NOORY: Synesthesia,
what is that?
>>PADGETT: Synesthesia is
a blending of the senses
like smelling a color.
People--somebody will say
that smells like blue.
The part of the brain
that is analyzing smell
is somehow wired to the part of
the brain that analyzes sight.
>>NOORY: Or I taste
red or something.
>>PADGETT: Exactly.
Exactly.
>>NOORY: This brain injury
you had, how old were you
and what happened?
>>PADGETT: I was 32.
And I had some friends
of mine had a few drinks
at a bar, a little karaoke bar.
And they called me and asked if
I could give them a ride home.
So I went there, had
a Coke, sang a song.
As we left, these two guys
attacked me from behind they
had been singing.
>>NOORY: For no reason?
>>PADGETT: It turned out
they wanted my jacket.
At the time, we didn't know--
>>NOORY: They
wanted your jacket?
>>PADGETT: Yeah.
I had like a $99 Wilson's
cheap leather jacket on.
And that's what they wanted.
And so they ran up
behind me, one of them
smashed me in the
back of the head.
It was just a fist.
But I didn't see it coming.
And so I felt this more--
almost heard this loud thump.
And saw a flash of white light.
And that flash that you
see is your brain bouncing
on the inside of your skull.
And the next thing I knew
I was on the ground getting
punched and kicked.
And I remember thinking like
I'm going to die right now.
And that fight or
flight instinct came on.
And I remember thinking I just
want to hurt one of these guys
before I die.
And I grabbed one of the guy's
legs because I was still dizzy.
And I tried to bite him, but he
had these big baggy pants on.
And I cracked my front teeth.
I bit down so hard.
>>NOORY: Did anybody
come to your aid?
>>PADGETT: No.
There was two people watching,
and people were taking
pictures in the restaurant.
But one of the guys that
were watching, I looked up
and I said help.
And I ducked a punch
And he put his
hands up like this,
turned around, and walked away.
>>NOORY: Like he didn't
want to get involved?
>>PADGETT: Yeah.
Making sure that
he was-- everybody
knew he wasn't going
to get involved.
And at that point, I was
like, wow, I'm alone.
And then finally at that,
we'd been fighting for maybe
like 30 seconds.
And one of them said
give me your damn jacket.
And I literally just
took my jacket off,
at that point was torn.
And they grabbed
it and ran away.
>>NOORY: 911 come?
The cops come?
>>PADGETT: Yeah.
Luckily, there was
a hospital literally
like 100 feet across the street.
The cops came, did a report.
They sent me to the
hospital in an ambulance.
And they diagnosed me with
a concussion and a bleeding
kidney.
And then a few hours later,
gave me a really strong pain
medicine shot and sent me home.
>>NOORY: The guy must have
hit you, unfortunately,
in the right spot?
>>PADGETT: Yes.
Yeah, it was right in
the back of the head.
And when you get hit in
the back of the head,
that tends to do
more damage to people
than being hit in the
front of the head.
>>NOORY: Right above like the--
>>PADGETT: Right in the
back, right back here
behind this part.
>>NOORY: And you
felt it right away?
>>PADGETT: Yeah, it was weird.
I heard it and saw it
more than I even felt it.
>>NOORY: Did you crack anything?
>>PADGETT: No, there
was no broken bones.
It was just the concussion
of my brain wiggling.
And your brain hits the
front of your skull,
and then it does what's
called a contrecoup, where
it whips back the
other direction
and hits the back of the skull.
>>NOORY: You had a
brain scan, right?
You flew to Finland.
Tell me about that.
>>PADGETT: Yeah.
So in Finland, they have
something called a functional
MRI.
So regular MRIs will just
like you can see a tumor
or you can see the geometry of
what's going inside your head.
A functional MRI has the
ability to somewhat map thought.
So what it does is it shows how
much oxygen your brain is using
and where.
So if, for instance, I were
to sit inside a functional MRI
and I were to play
the piano, the part
of my brain that controls
playing the piano starts to--
>>NOORY: Will be illuminated.
>>PADGETT: Will be illuminated
because it works harder
and it uses more oxygen.
And they can then
identify what part of my
brain is controlling that.
So they had me sit in
the functional MRIs
and do mathematics.
And they would look and see
what part of my brain worked,
and then compare it
to control subjects.
>>NOORY: When did
you realize, Jason,
that this brain injury
gave you new abilities?
>>PADGETT: The
first time I noticed
anything was on the ride home.
But I think it was
the pain medicine.
Everything looked very strange.
But the pain medicine
was very strong.
But the next day, I
noticed it immediately.
I had vertigo really badly.
When I watched water go down
the drain, instead of looking
smooth like it used to look,
it looked like little triangles
rotating or more like
even tangent lines
with triangles rotating and
getting smaller down the drain.
And when a car would move, I
would see the picture frames.
Instead of it looking smooth,
I would see picture frames.
But if a car was speeding
up, the picture frames
would get further apart.
And if it was slowing
down, the picture frames
would get closer together.
And the rate that
those distances changed
was describing things like
velocity and acceleration.
But I didn't have mathematical
terms to describe it.
All I had at that
point was layman terms.
So I started trying to
draw it, and I started
making up my own symbols.
And eventually, I went back
to school and found out
it was the exact same thing.
>>NOORY: But you didn't know
at that point you had a--
mathematical skills?
>>PADGETT: I knew
something was going on.
I worried, though,
that if I was having
like delusions of grandeur.
You see some guy who
is talking to himself,
and you know he's crazy.
But I was like what
are the-- what's
the odds of this happening?
Me suddenly having
these revelations
due to a head injury.
And so I would I would
go back and forth.
But then when I would
sit down and logically
go through the thought
process of what
I was trying to describe,
it would make sense.
>>NOORY: How did this injury
kind of change your perception
of the outside world?
>>PADGETT: So the
main thing that it
changed was the seeing
the picture frames.
And so when things
move normally,
everything looks smooth.
Now things always look
jittery and slightly pixelated
around the edges.
>>NOORY: So if you were looking
at me, I'd look jumpy to you?
>>PADGETT: Always.
Always.
And if you're speeding
up, your picture frames
get further apart.
And the rate that
those distances
change between
the picture frames
relative to the speed of
light is your velocity
and acceleration.
>>NOORY: Would my voice stay
the same or would that go?
>>PADGETT: Nope.
I don't notice
anything with voices.
Just visual.
It's all visual.
>>NOORY: That's amazing.
Did you think there was
something wrong with you?
>>PADGETT: Yeah.
I knew there was
something wrong.
I started getting
these muscle twitches
and my muscles
would like vibrate
and it would happen
hundreds of times per day.
I started having headaches.
I had vertigo and
difficulty walking.
Instead of things--
it didn't just
look like things
would spin, it would
feel like they would spin.
And it made it
difficult for my eyes
to move smoothly
because everything
looks jerky and discrete instead
of smooth and continuous.
>>NOORY: How do you
see the world today?
>>PADGETT: The same way.
It just takes a while
to get used to it.
And now--
>>NOORY: You accept it?
>>PADGETT: Absolutely.
I love it.
Even though there's
a bad side to it
and there's been a lot of
medical issues from it,
it's amazing.
I wish everybody could see it
because I think everybody would
understand it because it's much
more intuitive than equations.
Equations are always
describing geometry.
But geometry is more
natural for us to look at
and to understand
than equations.
And so I could
describe something,
and we will later hear-- we'll
describe calculus 2, calculus 3
in terms that are so simple
that everybody will get it,
but it's the exact
same thing as if you
went to school for two years.
The only difference is is you
can't prove it with geometry,
but you can still understand it.
Whereas mathematics allows
you to rigorously prove
the theorems.
>>NOORY: At what
point, Jason, did
you realize I may be a Savant?
>>PADGETT: What
really, really hit me
that something big was
going on is one day,
my daughter asked me how
the television worked,
because a commercial
for like Overstock.com
came on and had a big circle.
And she said how did
they make the picture
work on the television screen?
And I said, Oh,
there's little pixels.
And as they change color,
that changes the picture.
And she goes, you're wrong, dad.
And I go what do
you mean I'm wrong?
And she goes, how do you make
a circle with rectangles?
And I was like wait
a second, you can't.
I'm not looking at a
rectangle on that screen,
I'm looking at a zigzag.
It's just those pixels are
so tiny, it looks smooth.
>>NOORY: It looks like that.
>>PADGETT: But I can
take those pixels
and cut them in
half to infinity,
and you never reach
a perfect circle.
You just approach closer
and closer forever.
>>NOORY: How did you realize
there was a newer MRI
machine available in Finland?
>>PADGETT: With one of the
doctors that I spoke to,
I remember speaking with Dr.
Treffert and another doctor
named Berit Brogaard.
And they started putting
me on to these places that
were doing studies of
synesthesia and people
with Savant syndrome.
>>NOORY: So you flew
to Finland to find out
exactly how the injury
affected your brain?
>>PADGETT: Yes.
>>NOORY: And turned
you into a savant.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- It was an amazing experience.
There was a whole
bunch of images
flashing in front of my eyes
that were mixed in together.
Some were equations
that I would draw,
all sorts of different
pictures that would flash.
Some that were just mixed up.
Some that were obvious fractals.
Some that weren't.
The one that really stands out
was the one with little circles
that would expand and
get smaller, expand
and get smaller.
And eventually, it
would start to look
like it was a right triangle
rotating with the little radius
getting smaller and smaller and
smaller and larger and larger
and larger.
But it was very intense.
After a while, it just
started to feel hypnotic.
- So basically
what's happening is
that there's electric
current, like electric circuit
inside the coil.
And that current creates
a magnetic field.
So when we place it
against your scalp,
the magnetic field would
penetrate your skull,
and it will stimulate
neurons in the brain.
So that's basically
what's happening.
- This one when it goes just for
a second, it just kind of like,
I don't know how to describe it,
except for just suddenly having
your brain being distracted.
Just very momentarily, and
then OK, go back to OK,
that's what I was doing.
That's what I was thinking.
I'm trying to think, it's hard
to even describe the sensation.
- It was quite unusual
to see activations only
in the left hemisphere.
So normally like
even in, I think even
in language experiments, and
you see something in the right
also.
But it's so uniquely
in the left hemisphere.
[END OF VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>NOORY: So after this test,
what conclusions did they make?
What conclusions did you make?
>>PADGETT: So they
made a conclusion
that I had conscious
access to part of the brain
that we normally don't
have conscious access to.
And I was told that
I had Savant syndrome
and a form of synesthesia.
For me specifically, it's
seeing numbers as shapes,
because shapes are actually
the natural form of numbers.
>>NOORY: And this is
still happening to you?
>>PADGETT: Always.
In fact, I can't stop
thinking about it.
I have I have difficulty
sleeping at night
because there's just
so much to think about,
so much to wonder about.
And the way that reality works
is so much more interesting
and intricate than what
I think most people would
have imagined.
>>NOORY: I notice
on the screen there
was MC square flashed up there.
Einstein would be proud of you.
>>PADGETT: Yeah.
So I have written that in a
slightly different way, which
is called Planck
constant times frequency
equals mass times the
speed of light squared.
But it's still
describing energy.
They both equal energy.
But they describe energy
in different ways.
The Planck constant times
frequency describes it
in terms of frequency
and light, and mass times
the speed of light squared
describes it in terms of mass.
So one's quantum mechanics,
the other one's relativity.
>>NOORY: If I told
you 284 times 20,
would you instantly
know the answer?
>>PADGETT: No.
I don't do numbers.
I'm sure I could figure it out.
I'd be like 1,000, I don't know,
be like 7,200 and something,
280 I think.
>>NOORY: But we'd all have
to think it out like that.
>>PADGETT: Right.
Right.
But I still have
to think it out.
I don't-- like I don't do
like number calculations.
It's specifically like
if I look at a shape,
I still have to sit down
and I can describe it
to you in the exact
same way in layman terms
because when this
happened to me,
I had to find a way to
describe it in normal terms.
And so one day, I was actually
in the mall and I was drawing,
and a physicist
happened to come by
and he asked me
what I was drawing.
I said, well, I'm
trying to describe
the discrete
structure of spacetime
and the geometry of it.
And so we started talking.
And he said, you know,
it sounds like you're
trying to describe
unified field theory,
but you're doing
it in layman terms.
He said you have no
idea how weird that is.
>>NOORY: Because
you're not a scientist.
>>PADGETT: Right.
And he said, have
you ever considered
going back to school?
And I was like, you know,
that's probably a good idea.
And a week later, I went and
I enrolled in Math 99 Algebra.
And the very first day of class,
my teacher graphed an equation,
and I said you mean that
equation is that shape?
And she said yes.
And I said then we're
talking about the same thing,
just in two different ways.
I'm drawing what it looks like.
You're writing an
equation that you can then
graph what it looks like,
but they are identical.
>>NOORY: Was it easy for you?
>>PADGETT: Much of
it was very easy.
In fact, I thought that I came
in and I had pi drawn out.
And I had all these
drawings done.
And I thought I would
show them to a professor
and they would say
that's the number pi.
And let me explain to
you how we calculate it.
And they would say what is that?
It's a pretty picture.
And it wasn't until I
got to like trigonometry
and calculus that I could
write it in their terms.
And once I wrote it in
an equation and then put
the drawing with it, then
they were like it's--
they would agree 100%,
they have to agree
because it is the same.
But it was interesting
seeing how they didn't see it
until I wrote it in the language
that they were taught to speak,
which is equations.
>>NOORY: What do you think
happened to your brain
to allow you to do this?
>>PADGETT: I think we are all--
in fact, I know we
are all doing it.
So like if I throw a
ball to you, like we
don't think we're doing math.
But when I throw
that ball, you have
to calculate the acceleration
of the ball due to gravity.
The arc of the ball, the
three dimensional coordinates
of your hand and the ball,
the time lag from the nerves
to your fingers, yet
you just catch it.
But if we were to try to grasp--
or to sit down and crunch
that equation, it
would take us hours,
yet you just catch the ball.
So we're all doing
like estimated calculus
in the background,
even animals are.
To be able to
navigate the world,
you are defining velocity,
acceleration, probabilities.
And you're doing it
in a general way.
It just runs in the background.
So we're not aware of it.
I think it's a it's a
function of evolution
that it's so distracting
that it makes
you less likely to survive.
Like if this had happened
to me in the caveman days,
I would have been too busy
and distracted by everything
that was going on around me.
And I probably would have been
eaten by a lion or something.
>>NOORY: You would
have been considered
the Marconi of those days
or something like that.
Let's look at some
of your artwork.
You mentioned some of
the pictures that you do.
And you can explain to
us what we're looking at.
>>PADGETT: So that is the
number pi as it expands.
So what pi is--
a lot of times people think
it's like this magical thing.
>>NOORY: That's 3.14.
>>PADGETT: Yes, 3.14159.
But it actually what
pi is describing
is this shape forever
getting smoother and smoother
as it forever approaches a
circle, but never reaches it
because there's actually no
such thing as a circle anywhere
in the universe.
There's no such thing as a
perfect circle or a curve.
And the way to think
about it is everybody
who's watching this
right now on a screen,
your screen is made with
pixels, which are little squares
or rectangles.
So you're not seeing
a curve, you're
seeing an approximation
of a curve.
And if you look in closely,
you see the zigzag.
>>NOORY: How long did it take
you, Jason, to sketch this?
>>PADGETT: That took
months because that's
720 slices inside of
about a 18 inch circle.
>>NOORY: And you did
that by freehand?
>>PADGETT: That's all freehand.
I had to shave pencil
lead for each line.
And it has to be flawless.
>>NOORY: Geez.
>>PADGETT: So it's
also the rainbow.
When you see a double rainbow,
that ring that you see,
that is the double rainbow.
>>NOORY: What does that bright
light in the middle represent?
>>PADGETT: It's
just light, light
bursting out and refracting.
You can use this to describe
a lot of different things.
>>NOORY: Doesn't represent
the sun or anything like that?
>>PADGETT: Well, yeah.
The sun-- when you see the sun
or you see any light source,
it's going to look
just like that.
This also would represent
like gravitational lensing.
Or when you see rings, if you
take a camera, a video camera
and you point it at a light, you
start seeing these weird rings.
It's how the light refracts
at different angles.
>>NOORY: All right, let's
look at your second photo.
>>PADGETT: So this is--
yes, this is like the most
famous science experiment
probably in history.
It's the double slit experiment.
And it's how light, when you
shoot photons at two slits,
it will-- even if it
goes through one slit,
if you're not observing it, it
will interfere with itself as
though it passed through both.
So this shows the wave particle
duality that light has.
>>NOORY: If you show
this to a mathematician,
would they understand it?
>>PADGETT: Well, yeah.
Most of them would
understand it.
Once I say it's the double--
well, if it's a physicist,
they'll really understand it.
Mathematicians, it depends.
Everything is becoming
so specific nowadays.
Some mathematicians aren't
familiar with the double slit
test.
But I would think most are.
It's such a famous experiment.
>>NOORY: Have you been
put under a microscope
since this happened to you?
>>PADGETT: Not
under a microscope.
No.
>>NOORY: I mean, in terms
of them looking at you
and then trying to figure
out what's going on?
>>PADGETT: In some ways,
it's more with doctors.
My professors that
I worked with,
they were just interested in
the way that I would see things
would allow me to find
solutions that you don't-- that
aren't apparent when you're
looking at it just as numbers.
There's a lot more
involved in these drawings
than what I'm
explaining right now.
But when you go
into how they work,
it's much easier to understand
very high mathematical concepts
in regular terms when you're
just looking at a drawing.
Whereas when we go and we
learn derivatives and integrals
and calculus and you're
just crunching numbers,
it's very hard for the students
and for a lot of professors
to visualize how this actually
applies in the real world,
and what it is that
it's describing.
>>NOORY: Have your
savant abilities
helped you in the real
world or hindered you?
>>PADGETT: In some
ways, in the beginning,
it hindered me a lot
because OCD came on with it.
I had like agoraphobia.
I didn't leave my house for
like 3, 3 and 1/2 years,
except for just to get food.
I was kind of
depressed for a while.
>>NOORY: Panic attacks.
>>PADGETT: Yeah.
It was very-- it was bad.
But at the same time, it was--
there was this beautiful part
of it because this world
was opening up to me that I
had never known existed.
I was literally--
I would chase girls and party
and go out and goof off.
And life was very simple
and not very deep.
And then suddenly, it was like
the curtain was pulled back.
And bits of the universe that
I had never even contemplated
suddenly were very
obvious and fascinating.
>>NOORY: What does your
wife think about what
has happened to you here?
>>PADGETT: So she-- I met her
when I went back to school.
So she never knew me before,
which is probably good.
And I was in--
I was at the
cafeteria in school,
and she was an exchange
student or she was
visiting from another country.
And I was drawing, and she
asked me what I was drawing,
and we started talking.
And she has a lot of patience
because she's listened
to many theories and different
theorems over the years
at all different
times of the night.
But she's very understanding
and she's very smart too.
So I'd like to bounce
ideas off of her
and see what she
thinks of it sometimes
before I tell other people.
>>NOORY: Are you a
scientific study now?
>>PADGETT: In some--
I have been.
For me, the most
wonderful part about it
is just sharing
this with everybody.
It's like I feel like I
almost like swallowed a star.
I just feel like I'm
bursting with anybody
that comes by I just
want to talk to them
and say listen, I know you
think you don't understand it.
I know you think
you don't like math.
But let me tell you about this.
I worked in a store for a while.
My family owned
furniture stores.
And I would bring up any way
that I could to discuss math
with people, because even though
at first I would say something
about pi and I could see them
like backing up like, oh boy,
I don't want to talk about math.
>>NOORY: The only pi
they want to talk about
is apple or cherry.
>>PADGETT: Totally.
But then within a
couple of minutes,
they would be totally engaged
because they can understand it.
95% of everybody can
understand exactly what
I'm talking about in
mathematical terms,
but in simple mathematical
terms when you're
doing it with the drawings.
And it's literally
the same thing.
>>NOORY: A little
easier to comprehend.
>>PADGETT: Yes.
>>NOORY: Now joining us via
Zoom, incredible technology,
is Dr. Matt Doll from the
SSM Health Treffert Center
who met with Jason.
Is based in Fond
du Lac, Wisconsin.
Dr. Doll, welcome
to the program.
>>MATT DOLL: Thank
you for having me on.
>>NOORY: Tell us a
little bit about how
this meeting with Jason started.
>>DOLL: As Jason
mentioned, he had
met Dr. Treffert
several years ago
and had arranged his
further evaluations.
And then he came out
and visited with us.
And at that time, I was
meeting with Dr. Treffert
and had a chance to spend
some time with Jason.
>>NOORY: What do you think
of Jason's situation?
>>DOLL: It's quite remarkable
and unique and acquired
Savant's.
For the most part, we see
injury to the left hemisphere
and greater access to
the right hemisphere.
And Jason's case,
it's quite unique.
He had injury to his
right hemisphere.
And then now has access to
and processing information
more with his left hemisphere.
>>NOORY: When you look at
the brain through the scans,
does it show things
that are unusual?
I mean, can you
tell that there's
something that happened?
>>DOLL: Yes.
You would see that a task
that he would normally
in typical brains have
occurred on both sides
of his brain, the activity
was only on the left side.
And that was looking
at equations that
were resulting in an image.
Whereas equations that would
have no resulting image
only appeared on both sides.
And so how his brain is
processing information
is different from what we
would typically expect.
>>NOORY: Dr. Doll, why does
it take some kind of injury
to the brain to push him into
that other level of being
a savant?
>>DOLL: I think in
all of the stories
that we've had from different
kinds of experiences,
there's a process where
there's damage that occurs,
and then there's a recruitment
or an access to other skills
or abilities that we may have.
It is very rare,
and we certainly
don't recommend anyone
harm their head in order
to try to get
better at something.
But in these cases like
Jason, it is perception.
He's perceiving the
world differently.
And what he describes
is sort of almost a look
behind the curtain on
how we track motion.
And how our brains
track motion actually
in his visual cortex where that
injury occurred has changed.
And so now as a
form of synesthesia,
he's seeing the lines
as he describes pi
as a series of lines.
And so that perceptional
change is really
where he's able to
understand and start
to explain math in a very
unique and different way.
>>NOORY: Do we know
what will happen
in the future with Jason?
>>DOLL: You know what?
Our years of working
with acquired Savant's,
one of the downsides
is oftentimes
a compulsion, that sense that
I have to do this new skill.
As that skill is practiced over
time, that pressure lessens.
And then people become
very attached, if you will,
to their skill.
And there's concern that
it will fade over time.
And to our knowledge, those
skills do not fade over time.
But they do change.
And there's a
further exploration.
There's more comfort level.
And hopefully, some
of the negative side
effects of the injury
start to fade a little bit.
But as Jason says, he's
left with chronic headache
and a variety of other things
that he struggles with yet.
>>NOORY: The actor Dustin
Hoffman played in the movie
"Rain Man," which reminds
me a little bit of Jason.
Dr. Treffert worked
with the real "Rain Man"
that Dustin Hoffman portrayed
in the movie "Rain Man."
What was that like?
>>DOLL: Well, for
Dr. Treffert, it
was important to represent
these amazing minds
in the most accurate
and supportive way
of their unique abilities.
Kim Peek is a gentleman that
had absent corpus callosum.
So he missed the connecting
tissue between his two brains.
That actually allowed him
to read books with each eye
independently on each page.
And he had this incredible
memory for that.
And so he was considered the
human encyclopedia at the time.
But he also over the course of
time developed some insights
and made some connections, and
was quite a remarkable thinker.
And Dr. Treffert
really mirrored many
of the things he
recommended in the portrayal
that Dustin Hoffman had of the
savant on some other savants as
well.
Different skills and abilities
that they demonstrate too.
>>NOORY: And Dr.
Doll, not everybody
who suffers brain trauma turns
out to be a savant, right?
>>DOLL: That's correct.
We're finding that there are
certain areas of the brain.
And typically, there's one
area on the left side that sort
of functions as a governor or
a control over your right side
of your brain.
Dr. Treffert would talk about
it as an injury that releases
the tyrant of your left brain.
So you can access
your right brain.
And that seems to be the most
consistent finding within
Savant's.
Congenital savants are
born with differences.
But oftentimes,
those skills do come
from the wiring that
occurs that allows
them access to the right
side of their brains.
>>NOORY: How much
of the brain have we
learned about by this time?
>>DOLL: We're still
in the infancy stage.
There are some amazing
technologies that we've really
learned a lot.
We're starting to map networks.
And in some like diffuse
imaging technology,
it's really fascinating because
as Jason talks about the lines,
you actually see almost
these lines and patterns
in brain architecture
about the networks that
are connecting to each other.
>>NOORY: Elon Musk wants to put
a neuralink chip in our brains.
Will that help us or hurt us?
>>DOLL: I think that
technology is something that we
have to be very cautious about.
We have to understand
something thoroughly
before we start going
down those roads.
It certainly would be appealing
to try to interface more
with computers.
But I don't think
we even understand
what we're capable of when
we're still discovering
these amazing connections
and processes just
through the accidental
injuries that occur.
>>NOORY: Why do we need an
injury or some situation
in order to induce this?
Why can't we do it without that?
>>DOLL: There has been, as
Jason mentioned, some technology
that pulses some
magnetic interference
in different areas of
our brain, which allows
us to access other areas.
And we tend to think
of that especially
in our Western technology.
We're going to put
a helmet on instead
of learning to meditate,
for example, or practice
mindfulness.
We actually change our brain's
architecture when we meditate.
Six weeks of meditation
will actually
change your hypothalamus.
So we have more
control than we think
we do over accessing these
different skills and abilities.
It's through injury
that suddenly we
say, oh, I have
access or sometimes
disease process like
some forms of dementia.
But it is also possible
that through more
intentional practice
and some techniques
that we can learn that we
can access all of our brains.
>>NOORY: Are you still
working with Jason?
>>DOLL: Yes.
We continue to be
in conversations.
He's hopefully coming up and
visiting our newest place,
the Treffert Studios, so that
we can help him kind of put
together a visual representation
of how he perceives the world.
>>NOORY: Jason, take a few
minutes and chat with Dr. Doll.
>>PADGETT: How's it going?
>>DOLL: Really good.
How are you been doing?
>>PADGETT: Good.
I'm looking forward
to coming out there.
We're going to be making
some videos of how--
what pi is describing
geometrically,
and they're going to be helping
me do some other things that
have to do with the
holographic universe principle.
It's been really wonderful
working with you guys.
You guys have changed
my life for the better.
And granted me a lot of
understanding of what
was going on, so that I didn't
feel quite so different, and so
out of place in the world.
>>DOLL: It's a real
rare condition.
And I think that while it's
a truly a gift to mathematics
and the things that you're
able to do, the story that--
and when asked like what is it
about Jason that's so amazing?
I also think that part of the
story, Jason, where you really
sought out those people
that harmed you and looked
to reconcile.
And I just think your
kindness and genuine nature
is also one of your superpowers.
>>PADGETT: That was
one of the things that
was really amazing, is one
of my attackers reached out
to me about three
years ago and he
said he was watching a video.
And in the middle
of the video, he
said the video was
talking about these two
guys that attacked somebody.
And he said halfway
through the show,
he realized he was the bad guy.
And he sent me a
text on Facebook
and said I just want to
let you know I apologize.
And he now sits on a national
nonprofit for at-risk youth
helping them change their lives.
So he is-- it turned out
that in the long run,
it turned out to be a
wonderful thing for me.
And in the long
run, it turned out
it made his life better too.
>>NOORY: Did you
get the jacket back?
>>PADGETT: Didn't
get the jacket back.
But that's OK.
But he did confirm that,
that was why they did it.
One of them said, Oh,
I like his jacket.
And the other guy said,
Oh, let's take it.
And they just-- they
had too much to drink.
And they were young.
And had some bad
life experiences
that had just happened to them.
And when I look back
at it now, especially
after seeing how he
changed over the years,
I actually feel nothing
but compassion for him now.
>>NOORY: Right.
The Treffert Center, how
has it changed your life?
>>PADGETT: It's changed
my life because it
brought a lot more understanding
to what was going on.
It helped to relieve some of
the fear and also some of that
worry that I had of what if
what if I'm the only one who
sees this and it's not real?
They helped with that,
and also going to school
helped with that so that I
was able to write it properly
so that we knew for sure
that what I was doing
was correct, because I would
doubt myselves at time-- myself
at times just thinking that
it was too good to be true.
It was too good to be
true, yet eventually
was able to show that
what I was drawing
was what I thought it was,
just a different way of looking
at it.
>>NOORY: Dr. Doll, thank you
for being on Beyond Belief.
>>DOLL: It's
absolutely my pleasure.
Thank you very
much for having me.
>>NOORY: Jason, Dr. Doll
is a fascinating guy.
>>PADGETT: Yeah, he's
a very nice person.
They've changed my life.
>>NOORY: How did you find them?
>>PADGETT: Originally, I was
watching a television program,
and it was about a guy that was
talking about seeing numbers.
And that was the
first time I'd ever
heard anybody describe numbers
in a way that was visual.
>>NOORY: That was
happening to you.
>>PADGETT: Yes.
And Dr. Treffert from
the Treffert Center who
works with Dr. Doll
was on the show,
and I wound up emailing
them, and that's
how we came into
contact with each other.
>>NOORY: Fascinating, it is.
What about the Doppler effect?
Tell me about that.
What is that?
>>PADGETT: Yeah, the
Doppler effect is a good way
to describe relativity
so that everybody
can understand what
relativity is describing,
and why we all have
our own unique reality.
So you know how you
hear a car drive by you
and it goes and
it changes pitch?
So short wavelengths of
sound are a high pitch
and long wavelengths of
sound are a low pitch.
As the car is moving
towards me, those waves
are squishing together
and getting closer.
And so you hear the
pitch getting higher,
then it goes [VOCALIZES] and
now it's moving away from me
and they stretch out
and they get longer
and you hear the
pitch getting lower.
>>NOORY: Doppler
radar sort of thing.
>>PADGETT: And so now we
add relativity to that
and we say the car is
driving from me towards you.
Well, since it's
moving away from me,
the waves are getting
longer for me.
So I hear a low pitch.
But relative to you,
it's moving towards you.
So the waves are compressing
and you hear a high pitch.
And you stop right
there and say,
is the sound that
the car is making
a low pitch or a high pitch?
It's making both sounds
relative to who's looking at it.
And then you imagine we have
an infinite number of people
all looking at that car.
And they're all moving
at different velocities.
Every single person will
measure a different wavelength
and they'll all hear
a different sound,
yet everybody's
version of a reality
is correct, even though
they're all different.
And that applies to light--
>>NOORY: How can that be?
>>PADGETT: You
can take-- one way
that you can test it
is like take two guys
can go out with two cell phones
and have your buddy drive
his car in between you
while you film them.
And then play them
next to each other.
And you'll hear the
high pitch on one,
the low pitch on the other.
So where you are relative
to what you're observing
defines what it is.
But that doesn't
just apply to sound.
That applies to time,
that applies to light.
Everything about something.
You can change how big it is.
Everything about it.
You can change by changing
your motion relative to it
and to you, that is reality.
But to somebody else in
a different position,
and a different velocity,
they have a slightly different
picture.
But we all can agree
on reality around us
because we're all moving
generally the same speed.
But when you start approaching
the speed of light,
wild things happen.
And then you start having
vastly different experiences.
>>NOORY: Did you understand any
of this prior to your injury?
>>PADGETT: I thought
that I literally
would joke how math was stupid.
And I would say
when are you going
to use that in the real world?
And I remember thinking
that was so smart to say.
And now I look back
at it and I can't even
believe I thought that way.
Math is everything.
There is nothing that is not
described by mathematics.
>>NOORY: Are you in the
real world all the time?
>>PADGETT: Yeah, it depends on
what the real world is, right?
I think about this over
and over like every person
has their own individual
version of reality.
And I try to think
in different ways
to help me understand some of
these principles differently.
Like I try to think in terms of
superposition or probability,
where you try to imagine
going from point A
to point B. What are all the
ways that I can go there?
And what is the average
sum of all of those ways?
And that describes what
actually happens in reality.
When it gets down into physics,
that's how they describe it.
We are the sum of
all possibilities.
And all of those
possibilities cancel out.
And the one that
doesn't cancel out
is what happens almost
always in reality.
>>NOORY: Now how's
your health now?
You look good.
>>PADGETT: Yeah,
I'm feeling better.
I've actually-- when it
comes to like weight,
I'm feeling better.
When it comes to other
problems, they're pretty much
going to be there
for life when it
comes to like muscle twitches
and headaches and things
like that.
But I've learned to deal
with it better over time.
The OCD has gotten better.
I did this thing called
desensitization therapy.
I used to not be
able to open doors.
I would wait at
doors for somebody
to open it because
I wouldn't touch it.
>>NOORY: Why?
>>PADGETT: Just because
you're suddenly aware--
being aware of
everything visually,
I would watch somebody watching
and then wipe their nose
and then grab the door handle.
And then I would see somebody
else do something similar, then
grab the door handle and I would
think I just don't want it--
it would almost
feel hot and sticky
just because I was so aware of
everything that was going on
that I didn't notice before.
>>NOORY: And it bugged you?
>>PADGETT: Oh, it was awful.
I would carry hand sanitizer.
When I went to school, I
would bleach off the tables.
I have a medical grade
UV light sanitizer--
>>NOORY: You were
pre-COVID, weren't you?
>>PADGETT: Yeah.
And this was pre-COVID.
Now people joke that I
was just ahead of COVID.
>>NOORY: You were
ahead of your time.
>>PADGETT: Yeah.
Now everybody's starting
to feel something
similar to what I felt.
>>NOORY: I've got a
light bulb fixation.
If it's burned out, I
have to have it replaced.
>>PADGETT: Right.
Right.
And all those things are
different forms of compulsions
that we all feel.
And for me, it was just
getting to the point
where I was a little bit
more in control of them
instead of them being in control
of me, because a lot of times,
I would feel something--
like I wanted
to wash my hands constantly,
and I knew it was silly,
but I would still feel
the compulsion to do it.
And so what I did was
desensitization therapy,
where like we would clean a
doorknob with a bleach wipe.
And then I would make
myself touch the doorknob
and touch my face because
I know it's clean.
And surprisingly, it
only takes a few days.
So if there's anybody
that's suffering from OCD,
try that therapy.
You'd be surprised how
much it can help you.
>>NOORY: What is the Bekenstein?
>>PADGETT: So the Bekenstein
bound is the number of ways
that our universe
can be reconfigured.
Imagine our universe,
and our universe
is pixelated like a
television screen,
only the pixels are
very microscopic.
And the Bekenstein bound
asks, how many ways can we
rearrange the pixels
of our universe
to create a new and unique film
or a new and unique timeline?
And the number is 2 to the
10th to the 123rd power.
That's the number of
ways that our universe
can be reconfigured to
make a new timeline.
But in that-- but if you
have that many big bangs,
then the pattern
repeats, or if you go out
that many observable sized
universes in our universe
now, if you just go out
forever, eventually,
2 to the 10th power to 123rd
universe is away from us,
the pattern will repeat also.
So the Bekenstein bound is
just describing all the ways
that our universe
can be reconfigured
to make a new and unique film.
>>NOORY: You have a book
called "Struck by Genius."
Tell us about that.
>>PADGETT: Yeah, so
"Struck by Genius,"
I was lucky enough to
meet Maureen Seaberg.
She-- we met when I went to get
these scans done in Finland.
And she writes books.
And she wound up
writing the book for me.
And she did a fantastic job.
And it was an option to be made
into a major motion picture.
>>NOORY: There are
some people, Jason,
who believe we live in
a holographic universe.
What's your take on that
mathematically speaking?
>>PADGETT: I believe we do
live in a holographic universe.
So the holographic
universe principle
is describing how our
reality is a projection,
like a hologram that
is projected onto what
we call 4D flat spacetime.
But it's projected
from black holes.
But one of the problems
that we're having
is, where are the black holes?
And I think I have
a solution that
may allow us to
understand where they are
and why we don't see them.
>>NOORY: You're talking
like a savant now.
>>PADGETT: Well,
it's basically just
that black holes form
in between the picture
frames of our universe.
If you think of our
universe progressing
in time like a movie, in
between the picture frames when
you can't observe any
particles, they all
exist in superposition.
And wherever you have two
photons or the energy of two
photons or more on one
pixel of our universe,
it will by definition
collapse into
a tiny microscopic black hole.
And that black hole will
evaporate due to something
called Hawking radiation.
And that radiation
imparts a vector
onto the pixel, which then
describes the probability
of the wave function collapse.
And so the only thing
that I'm coming up
with that is potentially
new is the reason
why we see the effects
of black holes,
but we don't see them is
because they form and evaporate.
What we perceive as
reality is the evaporation
of the black hole,
so that then reform
again in between the
next picture frames.
>>NOORY: How would you like
to be remembered, Jason?
>>PADGETT: I would
like to be remembered
in terms of helping people to
understand or raise awareness
that all of us think
we don't like math.
And I understand the
courses are difficult.
And reading those books,
they can be monotonous.
But if you do it the right
way, even if you just
want to understand it, if
you look at it geometrically,
I've talked to tens of thousands
of people over the years.
And almost all of
them get nervous
when we start
talking about math.
But once we spend
5 or 10 minutes,
they're completely
engaged because everybody
can understand it if it's
shown to them the proper way.
And that's what I
would like to do
is just show everybody
you can understand it.
It's just it needs to
be in a language, which
is visual, which is how
we all live our lives.
We don't live our
lives with equations.
>>NOORY: How do people
get ahold of you
if they want to contact you?
>>PADGETT: If people
want to contact me,
one good way is on
Fine Art America.
I have a lot of my
drawings on there.
People contact me
on email there,
or find me on Twitter or
Facebook and friend me.
I have met so many
amazing people
over the years from online.
So if you're watching,
feel free to contact me.
>>NOORY: If you
turn the clock back,
would you want this to
happen to you again?
>>PADGETT: I would not
change this for the world.
It was in the long
run by far the best
thing that ever happened to me.
>>NOORY: Really?
>>PADGETT: Absolutely.
I met my wife because of it.
My children exist.
If I hadn't gotten mugged,
I wouldn't have met my wife.
My kids wouldn't be here.
I wouldn't have this
newfound love and fascination
for the world that I
didn't have before.
My life has changed so
much, and so much of it now
is for the better than that
the negatives are unimportant.
>>NOORY: And you
found forgiveness.
>>PADGETT: Absolutely.
I was surprised, because for
years, I hated those guys.
I mean, I must have killed them
in my head a million times.
>>NOORY: Who would blame you?
>>PADGETT: Right.
It was like I had so
much anger and I've
gone through so much pain.
But when he contacted me,
it just like melted away.
I realized that he
had a rough life.
And when I heard about what
had happened to him right
before that and that he
had turned his life around,
and he turned his
life around not
because he felt obligated to.
He turned his life around
before he found out
anything that had
happened to me,
because he wanted to
be a better person.
And I can understand that.
I was a silly teenager.
And I can remember some of the
stupid things that I thought.
And he completely changed.
>>NOORY: Jason, thanks for
being on Beyond Belief.
>>PADGETT: Thank you.
>>NOORY: You're a
fascinating individual.
>>PADGETT: I enjoyed it.
>>NOORY: And I wish you all
the success in the world.
>>PADGETT: Thank you.
>>NOORY: Fascinating person.
Would you want to go
through what he went through
to become a savant?
Most of us would say no.
But look at the results.
Thanks for watching
Beyond Belief.
[THEME MUSIC]